Let's understand how a service worker is registered.
We have an index.html file which probably loads an app.js file,
so this is all a traditional web application, nothing server worker-ish about it.
Now in the app.js file,
we can execute some code to register a service worker which lives in its own Javascript file, I'll show
you this code in the next lecture,
it's super simple.
This is some code which tells the browser, hey the content of the sw.js file is Javascript
but don't execute it right now as you do with all the other Javascript files,
instead please take it and register it as a background process, as a service worker. During that registration,
two lifecycle phases are reached -
first, the browser installs the service worker. During that it emits an install event which we can
hook into to execute some code inside of the service worker
whilst it is getting installed. You will later see how we use that to cache some assets,
some initial caching we want to do. There is another event which is executed as soon as installation finishes,
once the service worker is activated.
Now it's not necessarily activated right after the installation finishes,
it's activated as soon as it can be activated which depends on the question whether there is an old
version of the service worker running or not.
Service workers will only get active if there is no old service worker instance running,
so you might need to close existing tabs and re-open them to install a new version of the service worker
and I will show you how that works.
This is required because the service worker is not attached to a single page but to an overall domain
or scope
and as I said it lives on
even if you close the tab, so you have to make sure that at least no tab is open to be able to replace
it because then Chrome or whichever browser you use basically knows
OK it's now safe to switch it because no page is actively communicating with the service worker at least.
So then once the browser decides that it can be activated, the activate event will be fired
and in case it's not clear how that exactly works, we'll go through all the steps in the next lectures.
Once the service worker was activated, it now controls all pages of a given scope.
I'll come back to scope
too, it basically means that you can decide which parts of your application are controlled by a service
worker, put in other words,
which pages of your application can work with the service worker.
So for example if we want to listen to fetch events,
well if a page is outside of the scope of the service worker, the fetch listener in the service worker won't
trigger up on fetched requests of the pages outside of the service worker scope,
I'll show you how to set the scope in the next lectures too. Now
one important note about the install event or about how the browser installs a service worker,
you might wonder whether it always installs it whenever our application basically executes,
so if we refresh the page, does it then install our service worker again?
The answer is it depends.
It always executes this registration code which we're about to see in the next lectures but it doesn't
necessarily install the service worker,
it will only do that if your service worker file,
so the file housing your service worker Javascript code change by one byte or more, so if it changed
at all, it will install the updated version,
if it's the same file, if it is unchanged, then it will not install it.
It will still execute that registration code
but in the registration step, it will basically make this check, recognize that the file might not have
changed at all and then not trigger the install event here.
So that is something you have to keep in mind,
the browser will only install a service worker if it is an updated version or if it's for the first
time ever that you have one,
not on every page refresh. Once we have an activated service worker, it enters idle mode which means
it's basically just sitting there because I told you it's a background process handling events and
if no events are coming in, it's doing nothing. After a time of idling around, it will terminate,
this does not mean that it is uninstalled or unregistered, it just means it's kind of sleeping.
You can wake it up though or actually it will wake up automatically as soon as events are coming in,
so for example a fetch event and all the other events of course also apply, the events I showed you on the
previous slide. If a fetch
occurs, either due to an HTML file requesting a resource or you actively sending a fetch
request in your Javascript code, the service worker is woken up and put back into idle mode
and of course the fetch event listener is triggered there.
This is the service worker lifecycle,
now let's have a look at this in our code
and let's see how we actually register, install and activate the service worker and what we have to watch
out for.